TrACEr is a project under the Department of Data Science and Knowledge Discovery at SimulaMet. The project started in 2020 with partners from COPSAC (Danish Pediatric Asthma Center), University of Copenhagen and University of Amsterdam, and it is funded by the Research Council of Norway and Novo Nordisk Foundation. 

Data mining holds the promise to improve our understanding of dynamics of complex systems such as the human brain and human metabolome (i.e., the complete set of small biochemical compounds in the human body) by discovering the underlying patterns, i.e., subsystems, in data collected from these systems. However, discovering those patterns and understanding their evolution in time is a challenging task. The complexity of the systems requires collection of both time-evolving and static data from multiple sources using different technologies recording the behavior of the system from complementary viewpoints, and there is a lack of data mining methods that can find the hidden patterns in such complex data.

The goal of TrACEr project is to develop novel data mining techniques to jointly analyze static and dynamic data sets to discover underlying patterns, understand temporal dynamics of those patterns, and capture early signs of future outcomes. We will introduce a scalable and constrained data fusion framework that can jointly factorize heterogeneous data in the form of matrices and multi-way arrays, by incorporating temporal as well as domain-specific constraints.

These methods will be motivated by a real, challenging system: the human metabolome, and used to jointly analyze static genetic information and longitudinal metabolomics data to discover interpretable patterns, i.e., subsystems corresponding to metabolic networks (networks of metabolites acting together), with the ultimate goal of understanding their role in the transition from healthy to diseased states. 
